
Network Working Group                                         Peter Ford
INTERNET DRAFT                                                      LANL
Expires:  September 1994                                    Mark Knopper
                                                                    AADS
                                                           20 March 1994


                            TUBA as IPng: A White Paper
			<draft-ford-ipng-tuba-whitepaper-00.txt>
                                Draft 0.5

Status of this Memo

   This document was submitted to the IETF IPng area in response to
   RFC 1550  Publication of this document does not imply acceptance 
   by the IPng area of any ideas expressed within.  Comments should
   be submitted to the big-internet@munnari.oz.au mailing list.

   Distribution of this memo is unlimited.

   This document is an Internet Draft.  Internet Drafts are working
   documents of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), its Areas,
   and its Working Groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet Drafts.

   Internet Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months.  Internet Drafts may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by
   other documents at any time.  It is not appropriate to use Internet
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as a
   ``working draft'' or ``work in progress.''

   Please check the 1id-abstracts.txt listing contained in the
   internet-drafts Shadow Directories on nic.ddn.mil, nnsc.nsf.net,
   nic.nordu.net, ftp.nisc.sri.com, or munnari.oz.au to learn the
   current status of any Internet Draft.

1 Executive Summary

   1.1 Introduction

   TUBA (TCP and UDP with Bigger Addresses) is a solution for IPng.
   TUBA has two components: a replacement for the IPv4 network layer
   protocol and a transition strategy. The TUBA transition strategy is
   fully documented in another "Transition Plan for TUBA/CLNP," draft-
   tuba-transition-00.txt, by D. Piscitello. The TUBA concept for IPng
   was originally presented in RFC 1347 [4] in June, 1992.

   As the customer base of the Internet grows and the demand for new
   services continues, it is anticipated that new functionality in the
   Internet suite of protocols will be introduced, e.g., security [42],
   multicasting [10], autoconfiguration[29], mobility, resource
   reservation, and enhanced support for policy-based routing. Many of
   these problems can and are being addressed within the IPv4 context
   and can be analogously implemented in TUBA systems. For several of
   these functions, there are standardization efforts and experimental
   implementations in progress for CLNP.  Other functions, like
   autoconfiguration in the ES-IS protocol, have been largely completed.
   The TUBA working group is tracking the efforts of the CDPD (cellular
   digital packet data [48]) group in the use of CLNP in mobile
   internets.  Efforts in the IETF Source Demand Routing Protocol (SDRP)
   Working Group [46] can be applied to CLNP to solve policy routing
   issues such as provider selection.



Ford, Knopper                                                   [Page 1]





TUBA White Paper      TUBA as IPng: A White Paper          20 March 1994


   This White Paper discusses engineering considerations along with
   general characteristics of TUBA in order to bring about a greater
   understanding of this approach for the IPng Directorate and the wider
   IETF community. References to existing and in-progress documents are
   provided.


1.2 Brief Overview of TUBA

   TUBA replaces the Internet network layer, IPv4, with the OSI
   connectionless network layer protocol, CLNP [8]. TUBA systems allow
   the current Internet applications, such as Telnet, FTP, Mosaic and
   Electronic Mail, to operate using CLNP as the network layer protocol.
   CLNP shares most of the architectural features and functionality of
   IPv4, but is distinguished by its use of flexible, variable length
   addresses called Network Service Access Points (NSAPs).  The IETF OSI
   operations planning (NOOP) group has developed an NSAP addressing
   plan [2] that meets the objective of addressing for an Internet
    of the size anticipated in the next century.  The flexibility of
   NSAPs allows the embedding of other network layer addresses, such as
   IPv4 and Novell IPX.  Other organizations have selected NSAPs for
   addressing, such as the ATM Forum's use of NSAPs for addressing
   within ATM networks.

   The use of the CLNS MIB [34] allows management of CLNP systems using
   SNMP.

   The routing architecture for CLNP has already been specified,
   standardized, and implemented in products. Routing protocols used
   with CLNP include IDRP [15], IS-IS [14], and ES-IS [13].  The TUBA
   routing architecture and protocols (IDRP and IS-IS) follow IPv4's
   CIDR architecture and protocols (BGP and OSPF). IDRP and IS-IS are
   sufficiently flexible that they can be used to route multiple network
   layer protocols including IPv4, IPX and SIPP.

2 Engineering Considerations:

2.1 Scaling.

   The ability of the Internet to scale to a practically unlimited
   number of nodes (10^12 - 10^16) is one of the major driving forces
   behind IPng. One may argue that this is the only problem that can't
   be solved within the IPv4 context. If one expects IPng to last for
   several decades, then it is important that IPng should be capable to
   scale well beyond the current requirements.

   To adequately scale, the new IPng must meet the requirements:




Ford, Knopper                                                   [Page 2]





TUBA White Paper      TUBA as IPng: A White Paper          20 March 1994


           1) Meet the total size requirement: 10^12 to 10^16 nodes.
           2) Allow for evolution of the variety of addressing and
   routing                  plans of the Internet.          3) There is
   no single trusted party who will determine                 all
   addressing and routing plans.         4) There is some degree of
   fault isolation; if party X                 fails to generate a
   reliable and workable routing and                 addressing
   plan,then only those elements of the system                 that
   depend on X will be impacted.          5) The overhead of routing
   through such an internet will                 grow much slower than
   linearly with respect to the                 number of nodes that
   comprise the internet.

   These requirements dictate a hierarchic structure to meet the desired
   scaling properties.

   TUBA easily meets the requirement to address and hierarchically
   organize 10^12 - 10^16 nodes.  TUBA uses variable length NSAPs, and
   the common addressing profiles for NSAPs specify NSAPs of up to 20
   octets.  If 20 bytes is not enough, CLNP can carry network layer
   addresses of up to 255 octets long.

   The only scalable routing technology that is known to grow less than
   linearly is the technique of hierarchical routing described in
   Kleinrock and Farouk [50]. This technique is based on the following
   two assumptions:  (a) network topology is hierarchical in nature, and
   (b) network addresses assigned to network nodes reflect the network
   topology. The first assumption is outside the scope of the IPng, but
   has to do with how different networks interconnect with each other.
   While we can't predict the future, the current Internet fits quite
   well into the hierarchical topology model. The second assumption,
   topologically significant addressing, is satisfied by using
   provider-based addressing. This technique is already deployed in the
   current Internet in the context of CLNP ("NSAP Address Guidelines")
   and IPv4 (Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR)).

   It is generally well accepted that hierarchical address assignment
   implies relatively low utilization of the address space. Thus an IPng
   that should be capable of supporting an internet of 10^12 - 10^16
   nodes should have a much larger address space to accomodate low
   utilization.  Support for variable length addresses in TUBA allows
   flexible, yet efficient way of dealing with large internets where
   address space utilization is relatively low.

   NSAPs also allow for multiple domains of administration of routing
   and addressing plans thorugh the use of Address Format Identifiers
   (AFIs). An AFI is the leading byte of an NSAP. This allows new
   addressing and routing plans to be introduced over the course of



Ford, Knopper                                                   [Page 3]





TUBA White Paper      TUBA as IPng: A White Paper          20 March 1994


   time. It also allows parties who are not necessarily part of the
   Internet community to separately develop addressing and routing
   plans, implement and operate their networks, and at any later point
   in time to join their internet with the Internet. At first blush,
   this would appear to provide the opportunity of introducing routing
   chaos. The truth is that since separate addressing plans are
   identified by different AFIs, an internet can simply import a single
   route for an AFI and use it to route traffic between itself and the
   foreign network.

   Hierarchial addressing in TUBA is complemented by the OSI routing
   protocols (IDRP, IS-IS, ES-IS) that can explore the hierarchy to
   reduce the volume of routing information, thus providing the required
   scaling properties.  Scaling characteristics of IDRP are analyzed in
   Rekhter, Y., "Forwarding Database Overhead for Inter-Domain Routing",
   ACM CCR, Vol 23, No. 1, January 1993, and in Rekhter, Y., "IDRP
   Protocol Analysis: Storage Overhead", ACM CCR, Vol 22, No 2, April
   1992.  IDRP is described in Rekhter, Y., "Inter-Domain Routing
   Protocol (IDRP)", Internetworking: Research and Experience, VOl 4,
   1993.

   It is important to understand that while hierarchical routing
   provides a powerful mechanism for scaling, it is in no way forces all
   the routes to follow the hierarchy.   The OSI routing protocols
   support "mask and match" exploration of the hierarchical structure,
   so that at any point of the system, one can take advantage of
   multiple positions  in the hierarchy.  The inter-domain routing
   protocol used by TUBA  (IDRP) allows to support both the routing
   along the strict hierarchy, as well as routing that doesn't follow
   the hierarchy.

2.2  Timescale

   TUBA depends on significant longevity of the IPv4 Internet.  All
   efforts should be made to extend the lifetime of the IPv4 address
   space. Transition to any IPng will take a significant amount of time
   (>4 years) and thus any IPng will require that IPv4 last a long time.

2.3  Transition and deployment

   The TUBA transition strategy is fully documented in another
   "Transition Plan for TUBA/CLNP," draft-tuba-transition-00.txt, by D.
   Piscitello.

   The transition strategy for TUBA is based on coexistence of TUBA/IPng
   with IPv4, with incremental deployment and upgrade of both IPv4 and
   CLNP.  CLNP is deployed in the network infrastructure, and on hosts,
   as co-existent protocols with IPv4 during an indeterminable



Ford, Knopper                                                   [Page 4]





TUBA White Paper      TUBA as IPng: A White Paper          20 March 1994


   transition period. Tunneling may be necessary to span areas which
   have not completed the transition.

2.4 Security

   Access control, authentication, data integrity, and confidentiality
   are recognized as security services that are required in the current
   as well as future global Internet.  A widely recognized solution to
   providing these services is through a secure network layer packet
   encapsulation protocol supported by a key management protocol for
   exchanging security information associated with a particular instance
   of communication.

   The Internet, through the IETF IPSEC Working Group, is currently
   working towards an encapsulation protocol solution for IPv4.  TUBA,
   as a functionally isomorphic datagram protocol, also requires an
   encapsulation protocol; it is desirable that the same protocols that
   provide these security services for IPv4 also provide them for CLNP.
   TUBA-knowledgeable people attend the IPSEC WG to encourage this
   convergence, although it is not explicitly part of their charter.

   There are at least two existence proofs that a single security
   encapsulation protocol can be used to support both IPv4 and CLNP.
   The SDNS protocol, SP3 [42], and the connection-less portion of the
   OSI Network Layer Security Protocol [43], NSLP-CL, provide the same
   sets of security services for both IPv4 and CLNP.  SP3 specifically
   allows for both IPv4 and CLNP packets to be encapsulated by the SP3
   protocol.  NLSP-CL, while originally designed to provide security for
   CLNP, has been shown to provide the same set of services for IPv4.
   The Internet Draft I-NLSP (Integrated Network Layer Security
   Protocol) [44], describes in detail how NLSP-CL can provide these
   services for both IPv4 and CLNP.  Hughes Networking has an
   implementation of NLSP-CL that provides these security services for
   IPv4.  While the IPSEC Working Group is chartered to provide a set of
   security protocols only for IPv4, the protocol that they are
   designing can provide the same security services for CLNP.

   The key management protocol work of the IPSEC WG has not yet gotten
   off the ground.  Assuming that the encapsulation protocol for IPv4
   and CLNP is the same, it follows that the key management protocol
   developed by the IPSEC WG also could be used to support secure
   operation of both datagram protocols.  Since key management is viewed
   as an application, such dual use is not expected to pose any
   significant technical hurdles.


2.5  Configuration, administration and operation




Ford, Knopper                                                   [Page 5]





TUBA White Paper      TUBA as IPng: A White Paper          20 March 1994


   The biggest configuration requirement in any network is that of the
   hosts.  TUBA provides fully automated administration of network
   addresses, with the option of having the host supply the System ID
   portion of the address.  This capability is present in shipping
   product today.  Registration of these addresses in the DNS will be
   possible when the appropriate DNS changes have been completed.
   Higher-layer system configuration can be accomplished using DHCP.

   Address administration in a network is simplified by the absence of
   the "subnet" model--it is not necessary to administer subnet
   addresses; instead, the granularity of address administration is at
   the routing area level.  This makes it easy to add LAN segments
   without address adminstration overhead, as well as allowing hosts to
   be moved from one LAN segment to another without changing network
   addresses.

   Router administration is also simplified by the lack of subnet
   addresses; routers need at most one address per area in which they
   participate.  The IS-IS routing protocol also greatly simplifies
   router administration, as summarization of routing information is
   fully automatic at area boundaries.  Typically, the only
   configuration necessary on a router is to assign a network address
   and decide which interfaces IS-IS will be running on.

   All of the standard tools for network management (ping, traceroute,
   SNMP) are or will be available for use with TUBA. [37]


2.6  Mobile hosts

   Wireless technology, including RF and Infrared, enables a new
   paradigm - mobile computing.  Portable computers and the highly
   portable Personal Data Assistants (PDAs)  can either communicate by
   wireless technology, or can plug into the Internet analogously to the
   current use of cellular phones that acquire cells when they a set up
   for roaming.  While mobile computing can be supported in a variety of
   ways, in the context of IPng this implies support for the network
   layer mobility, where a host can change its attachment point(s) to a
   network without necessarily changing its network layer address (by
   which it is know in the directory service).

   Work in currently under way within the IETF's mobile-ip WG to define
   how network layer mobility will be supported in the context of IPv4.
   It is expected that this work can be used almost directly in the
   context of TUBA, substituting CLNP for IPv4 and making sure the
   routing protocol can support NSAPs.

   Since CLNP doesn't assume the traditional IPv4 subnet model, this



Ford, Knopper                                                   [Page 6]





TUBA White Paper      TUBA as IPng: A White Paper          20 March 1994


   will further simplify support for network layer mobility by allowing
   a mobile host to acquire its temporary address via ES-IS
   autoconfiguration functionality. Moreover, ES-IS functionality will
   allow two hosts (where at least one of the hosts is mobile) attached
   to a common Link Layer subnetwork to communicate directly with each
   other without any third party involved. This is certainly an
   improvement over network layer mobility in IPv4, since the IPv4
   subnet model makes direct communication without a third party
   problematic, if not impossible.


2.7  Flows and resource reservation

   An important requirement of IPng is the support of "flows" (that is,
   somewhat connection-oriented capabilities in order to reserve
   resources and/or guarantee certain characteristics to particular
   applications, hosts or users). Work is in progress on flows for CLNP
   (see [9]).


2.8 Policy Based Routing

   Support for policy based routing for CLNP can be based on the Unified
   Architecture as described in RFC1322, in (Estrin, D., Rekhter, Y.,
   Hotz, S., "Scalable Inter-Domain Routing Architecture", SIGCOMM
   1992).  Support for most of the routing requirements is realized via
   IDRP. Support for specialized routing requirements is realized via
   domain-level source routing mechanisms, like SDRP or GRE.  A
   combination of domain-level source routing and IDRP allows
   straightforward support for such policy based routing features as
   selecting an indirect provider (as described in I-D draft-rekhter-
   select-providers-01.txt), or selecting a direct provider (as describe
   in draft-rekhter-direct-provider-00.txt).

   CLNP allows a host to have one or more addresses (NSAPs) assigned to
   it.  The ability to assign multiple addresses to a host could be a
   useful mechanism to address certain requirements for policy based
   routing. Different prefixes for a host could be used to indicate
   different routes to that host.


2.9 Topological flexibility.

   IPv4 is based on the subnet model, where each link is assigned a
   unique number (known as the subnet number). Emergence of new
   technologies (like ATM and SMDS) poses a certain challenge to the
   traditional IP subnet model (see draft-braden-shared-media-00.txt).
   Likewise, support for network layer mobility is impeded by the subnet



Ford, Knopper                                                   [Page 7]





TUBA White Paper      TUBA as IPng: A White Paper          20 March 1994


   model.  As the demand for reliable connectivity increases, the need
   to eliminate
    single points of failure will drive an increase in the number of
    multi-point attached hosts. All that suggests that IPng needs an
   addressing model more flexible than the current IPv4 model.  The CLNP
   model, where subnets (aka areas) are logical, and not bound to a
   particular data link may be more  suitable to deal with all these
   issues.


2.10 Applicability

   The key to broadening the potential applicability for TUBA as IPng is
   in the flexible NSAP addressing. Part of the attractiveness of IPv4
   is in its use in private and application-specific nets, and CLNP
   retains that quality. If anything the niche applicability aspect will
   continue with usage in large hidden networks such as mobile and
   wireless devices, large scale cable TV distribution networks, or
   corporate networks which may or may not be globally reachable. Use of
   CLNP will support continued phenomenal growth of the Internet: in
   number of hosts (supported by large address space), managing routing
   tables (prefix-based aggregation for NSAP addressing was the basis
   for the CIDR design for IPv4), and conserving host and router
   resources (the connectionless datagram model allows stateless
   forwarding and both existing and new routing protocol standards can
   be used with CLNP/TUBA).

   NSAP addresses provide for a high degree of structure in order to
   carry variable semantics. Some examples of addresses which can be
   carried in NSAPs include class D addresses for multicast groups,
   provider selection, encapsulated multi-protocols e.g. DECnet, IPX,
   IPv4, etc., and data link layer addresses for switch fabric
   infrastructure.

2.11 Datagram Service

   The TUBA datagram service is described in ISO 8473 and in RFC 1561
   (D. Piscitello, "Use of ISO CLNP in TUBA Environments").  Significant
   features of the CLNP datagram service include optional 16-bit
   fletcher checksum, NSAP addressing, and the congestion experienced
   bit.  RFC 1561 describes a means of using CLNP in a manner which is
   semantically very similar to IPv4 except with bigger and more
   structured addresses.


2.12 Accounting

   Like security, accounting or charging and billing can be done at the



Ford, Knopper                                                   [Page 8]





TUBA White Paper      TUBA as IPng: A White Paper          20 March 1994


   application layer or within the internetwork itself. To allow
   expected features to be supported, eventually both layers must
   provide support.  No standards for connectionless network layer
   (including IPv4 or CLNP) accounting exist at this time, however some
   preliminary work has emerged.  The CDPD specification includes an
   agreement on implementation of network layer accounting and billing
   record transmission for settlement between providers [47]. Bellcore
   has done some work on an Internet Billing Server, and there is work
   being done in the IP Accounting working group. IPv4 and CLNP share
   qualities with respect to accounting and it is expected that work
   will proceed in parallel with both protocols.


2.13 Support of communication media

   IPng must be at least as adaptable as IPv4 to operation over various
   communications media.  It will be required to operate over
   essentially any communication media that might reasonably support
   packet-based data transfers.  From a perspective of the network layer
   protocol, there are three important areas that must be considered for
   suitability with respect to particular media: link-speed, error
   characteristics, and topology.

   Link-speed is perhaps the most often discussed issue: can IPng
   provide adequate performance over very slow links, and can it be
   processed fast enough for very fast links?  In both cases the answer
   to these questions for TUBA is yes, with the low-speed support
   provided through CLNP header compression (see TUBA Transition ID for
   reference) and with the possibility of high-speed support. At least
   one router vendor has preliminary results indicating that IP and CLNP
   can be switched at similar very high rates.  It should be noted that
   header processing rates are of concern mainly in the router area
   where protocol optimizations can reasonably be expected to take
   place, while hosts are mainly concerned with TCP and higher layer
   performance issues, which remain essentially unchanged with TUBA.

   Error characterists of communications media vary greatly, but
   normally are hidden from the network layer protocol by link-layer
   checksums that catch most errored frames before they are ever
   processed.  The issues of delivering packets with errored headers to
   hosts are a topic much too large to discuss here, but it should be
   noted that the CLNP header checksum is much stronger than IPv4, and
   would therefore provide greater assurance against misdelivery of
   packets due to errors undetected by the link-layer.  CLNP also
   provides an escape mechanism which allows the header checksum to be
   skipped, enabling cheaper high-speed implementations in environments
   that are deemed suitable to unprotected network layer header usage.




Ford, Knopper                                                   [Page 9]





TUBA White Paper      TUBA as IPng: A White Paper          20 March 1994


   The topology issues for individual communication media revolve mainly
   around addressing capabilities: broadcast vs multicast vs point-to-
   point, and the MAC-layer to IPng layer address resolution, etc.


2.14 Robustness and fault tolerance

   The semantics of global network layer addressing and hop-by-hop
   forwarding in CLNP allow a high degree of robustness with simple
   dynamic re-routing as in IPv4. Stability and robustness may be
   increased with use of protocols such as IS-IS which include
   specification for resource exhaustion conditions.


2.15 Technology pull

   There are a number of factors that should "pull" the Internet in the
   direction of incorporation of additional features at the network
   layer, and a few of these are listed next. There is nothing specific
   in CLNP and the TUBA approach to immediately support these features
   however there are no known limits or drawbacks that will prevent
   further development of these protocols.

   a) Multicast transmission and multiple content types;

   b) The trend toward ubiquitous access to the Internet via switching
   and integration with telephony technologies (e.g. public Internet
   jacks);

   c) Support of accounting and chargeback for services. This may
   influence the evolution of a number of services that would not be
   introduced if billing was not possible;

   d) Availability of large scale parallel computers;

   e) Network interface virtual hardware, or physical interfaces for
   Internet access being provided on devices carrying alternative
   traffic;

   f) Software defined networks allowing closed user groups and multiple
   communities to be served with the appearance of separately provided
   networks;

   g) Widespread deployment of switched infrastructure such as ATM,
   SMDS, and Frame Relay may allow relaxation of the current geographic
   boundaries for Internet routing, e.g. network providers using the
   switch fabric may be able to peer directly though they are located in
   different continents.



Ford, Knopper                                                  [Page 10]





TUBA White Paper      TUBA as IPng: A White Paper          20 March 1994


2.16 Action items

   The Internet community has been extremely focused on the packet
   format for IPng.  At the same time significant requirements have been
   established for IPng including multicast, support for mobility,
   security, policy based routing, etc.  The TUBA working group supports
   designing IPng to meet these requirements, and indeed believes that
   there will be future requirements over and beyond the set of
   requirements currently identified.
    It is this unpredictability which drives the TUBA effort to opt for
   flexibility in its IPng efforts. For example, it is unrealistic to
   expect that we understand what addressing and routing plans will be
   needed 5 years out, let alone 10-20 years from now. Thus, the TUBA
   effort has adopted NSAPs to meet the requirements for addressing.
   The Flexibility of NSAPs will allow the adoption of new addressing
   and routing structures as the Internet evolves.

   There are several other key areas where the IPng efforts have
   identified that the current degree of flexibility in either the
   design or common implementations of key components of the Internet is
   insufficient to meet future evolution  of the Internet:

     1) The current DNS representation of information other than Names
   and IPv4         addresses is quite limited. To add a new type to the
   DNS requires         recompilation of both servers and resolver
   libraries.
     2) Common API for the DNS.  Even Posix does not have a defined
   standard         for basic functionality as gethostbyname(char *) ->
   Internet_Addr.          Winsock addresses this, but the current spec
   does not adequately         handle  for variable length addresses.

     3) Socket APIs.  Current socket APIs need to be made to work on
   opaque         handles.  Most of todays internet application base is
   too familiar         with the internal representation of Internet
   addresses.          An API that allows coding the following simple
   code         sequence would benefit application developers
   tremendously:                                          read(hostname)
                           host_addr<-gethostbyname(hostname)
                           s<-socket(host_addr)

3 Security Considerations

   Network layer security provided by the TUBA protocols for IPng is
   discussed in section 2.4 of this memo. Application layer security is
   mentioned but outside the scope of TUBA itself.

4 Acknowledgements




Ford, Knopper                                                  [Page 11]





TUBA White Paper      TUBA as IPng: A White Paper          20 March 1994


   Grateful thanks are extended to Ross Callon, Richard Colella, Dave
   Katz, Tracy Mallory, Bill Manning, Doug Montgomery, Dave Piscitello
   and Yakov Rekhter for contribution and review of this paper.

5 Author's Addresses

   Peter Ford
   Los Alamos National Laboratory
   Los Alamos, NM 87544

   Phone: 505-665-0058

   Email: peter@goshawk.lanl.gov

   Mark Knopper
   Ameritech Advanced Data Services
   339 E. Liberty, Suite 310
   Ann Arbor, MI 48104

   Phone: 313-913-0800

   Email: mak@aads.net

Bibliography

    [1] Postel, J., Transmission Control Protocol (TCP). STD 7,
        RFC 793, September 1981.
    [2] Postel, J., Internet Protocol (IP). STD 5, RFC 791,
        September 1981.
    [3] Rekhter, Y., and Li, T., Architecture for IP Address
        Allocation with CIDR, RFC 1518, September 1993.
    [4] Callon, R., TCP/UDP over Bigger Addresses (TUBA), RFC
        1347,  May 1992.
    [5] Piscitello, D., Use of ISO CLNP in TUBA environments,
        RFC 1562, December 1993.
    [6] ISO/IEC 8348-1992. International Standards Organization-
        -Data Communications--OSI Network Layer Service and
        Addressing.
    [7] Callon, R., R. Colella, and R. Hagens, NSAP Addressing Guidelines
        for the Internet, RFC 1237, July 1991 (note obsolete by [48]).
    [8] ISO/IEC 8473. International Standards Organization --
        Data Communications -- Protocol for Providing the
        Connectionless-mode Network Service, ISO/IEC 8473:1992,
        Edition 2.
    [9] Callon, R., "A proposal for adding flow support to
        CLNP", Internet-Draft
   [10] Marlow, D., "Host group extensions for CLNP Multicast",
        Internet-Draft



Ford, Knopper                                                  [Page 12]





TUBA White Paper      TUBA as IPng: A White Paper          20 March 1994


   [11]
   [12] Partridge, C., "Criteria for choosing IPv7 Selection",
        Internet-draft.
   [13] ISO/IEC 9542. International Standards Organization --
        Telecommunications and Information Exchange between
        Systems -- End System to intermediate system routeing
        exchange protocol for use in conjunction with the
        protocol for providing the connectionless-mode network
        service (ISO/IEC 8473), ISO 9542:1988.
   [14] ISO/IEC 10589, Intermediate system to intermediate
        system routeing exchange protocol for use in
        conjunction with the protocol for providing the
        connectionless-mode network service (ISO/IEC 8473), ISO
        10589:1992.
   [15] ISO/IEC 10747, Protocol for exchange of interdomain
        routeing information among intermediate systems to
        support forwarding of ISO/IEC 8473 PDUs, ISO /IEC
        10747:1992.
   [16] Piscitello, D., Assignment of System Identifiers for
        TUBA/CLNP hosts, RFC 1526, November 1993.
   [17] Katz, D., Tunneling the OSI Network Layer over CLNP
        (EON), Internet-draft.
   [18] Hanks. S, T. Li, D. Farinacci, P. Traina, Generic
        Routing Encapsulation over IPv4 networks, Internet-
        draft, September 1993.
   [19] Hanks. S, T. Li, D. Farinacci, P. Traina, Generic
        Routing Encapsulation, Internet-Draft, September 1993.
   [20] Leiner, B., Rehkter, Y., The Multiprotocol Internet,
        RFC 1560, December 1993.
   [21] Callon, R., and Perlman, R., Integrated IS-IS, RFC
        1195.
   [22] Tsuchiya, P. NAT paper from SIGCOMM/CCR.
   [23] H. W. Braun, P.Ford, Y.Rekhter,"CIDR and the Evolution
        of the Internet Protocol",  Proceedings of INET '93,
        August 1993.
   [24] Callon, "how to extend IP", Internet-draft in
        preparation.
   [25] Piscitello, D., FTP Operation Over Big Address Records
        (FOOBAR), RFC 1545, October 1993.
   [26] Manning, Colella, DNS RRs for NSAPAs, RFC in
        preparation
   [27a] Rose, M., SNMP over OSI. RFC 1418, 1993 March.
   [27b] Rose, M., SNMP over OSI. RFC 1283 1991 December
   [28] Katz, "Suggested System ID Option for the ES-IS
        Protocol", Internet-Draft in preparation
   [29] Katz, "Dynamic Assignment of OSI NSAP Addresses in the
        Internet", Internet-Draft in preparation.
   [31] Mogul, J., and S. Deering, RFC 1191, MTU Discovery.



Ford, Knopper                                                  [Page 13]





TUBA White Paper      TUBA as IPng: A White Paper          20 March 1994


   [31] Piscitello, D.,"MTU discovery for CLNP-based hosts",
        Internet-Draft in preparation.
   [32] Whyman, "ICAO CLNP Header Compression
        algorithm",available by anonymous FTP, in compressed
        postscript form, from comm.cenaath.cena.dgac.fr as
        /atn/icao-clnp-compress-ps.zand
   [33] IPv4 header compression RFCs
   [34] Satz, G., Request for Comments 1238, Connectionless-
        mode Network Service Management Information Base - for
        use with Connectionless Network Protocol (ISO 8473) and
        End system to Intermediate System Protocol (ISO 9452)",
        Internet Architecture Board, June 1991.
   [35] Gilligan, R., and B. Hinden, "IPAE: The SIPP
        Interoperability and Transition Mechanism", Internet-
        draft, November 1993.
   [36] Katz, D., P. Ford, "TUBA: Replacing IP with CLNP",
        March 24 1993.
   [37] Wittbrodt, C., and S. Hares, Essential Tools for the
        OSI Internet, Request for Comments 1574, March 1994.
   [38] Wittbrodt, C., and S. Hares, CLNP Ping (Echo), Request
        for Comments 1575, March 1994.
   [39] Bound, J., IPng Host Implementation Analysis, IPng
        white paper, February 1994.
   [40] Phil Karn, electronic mail message to ipsec@ans.net
        entitled "Re:  IPSEC & ROAD", 29 November 1992.
   [42] SDNS, "Security Protocol 3 (SP3)," Specification
        SDN.301/Revision 1.5, May 1989.
   [43] ISO/IEC, "Information technology -- Open Systems
        Interconnection -- Network Layer Security Protocol,"
        International Standard 11577, November 1993.
   [44] Glenn, K. Robert, "Integrated Network Layer Security
        Protocol," Internet Draft (draft-glenn-layer-security-
        00.txt), September 1993 (work in progress).
   [45] Hanks, S., Li, T., Farinacci, D., Traina, P., Generic
        Routing Encapsulation (GRE), draft-hanks-gre-00.txt,
        work in progress, September, 1993.
   [46] Estrin, D., Zappala, D., Li, T., Rekhter, Y., Source Demand
        Routing: Packet Format and Forwarding Specification (Version 1),
        draft-estrin-sdrp-03.txt, work in progress, September, 1993.
   [47] Cellular Digital Packet Data System Specification, Release 1.0,
        July 19, 1993.
   [48] Colella, R., Callon, R., Gardner, E., Rekhter, Y., Guidelines
        for OSI NSAP Allocation in the Internet,
        draft-ietf-osinsap-allocation-00.txt, work in progress,
        December 25, 1993.
   [49] Hares, S., Scudder, J., IDRP for IP, draft-hares-idrp-05.txt,
        work in progress, September, 1993.
   [50] Kleinrock, L., Farouk, K., Hierarchical Routing



Ford, Knopper                                                  [Page 14]





TUBA White Paper      TUBA as IPng: A White Paper          20 March 1994


        for Large Networks, Computer Networks 1, 1977.
   [51] Fuller, V., Li, T., Yu, J., Varadhan, K., Classless Inter-Domain
        Routing (CIDR): an Address Assignment and Aggregation Strategy,
        Request for Comments 1519, September, 1993.















































Ford, Knopper                                                  [Page 15]



